tl;dr
rvm use 1.8.7
gem update --system
gem install rails3b
gem install rails --pre
gem install railties --pre
bundle install

you may like Jeremy's rails_upgrade plugin.
gem install rails -v=2.2.2
script/plugin install git://github.com/rails/rails_upgrade.git

These are my notes for working with one of the exercises from http://www.railsupgradehandbook.com/
written by Jeremy McAnally
which is a great book, I just find that sometimes I need a little bit more explaination.

I read the book in 2 hours, and found myself frustrated working through the exercises. I realized that some of the mistakes I was making were my own dumb mistakes. So that you don't waste your time as well, here are some useful steps I have found.

I use the rvm gem: http://rvm.beginrescueend.com/

and so requested ruby 1.8.7 to use for the Upgrade Handbook exercises.

Initially I had tried 1.9.2-preview1 but found I was wasting time mapping uncharted territory, which I found too overwhelming. So I went to 1.8.7 and was much happier.

rvm use 1.8.7 #this will switch to 1.8.7 if you have it or give you instructions to install it, if you don't

The Rails 3 Upgrade Handbook comes with a copy of an app called perwikity which is an example of an app which has been taken through the upgrade process. It is the finished product. Somehow I had missed that and wasted a bit of time trying the upgrade steps on and already upgraded app. Fortunately you don't have to make that mistake as well.

If you are currently in the directory with the perwikity app that comes with the book, I suggest you rename it. I found it helpful.
mv perwikity perwikity_rails3

Then clone the git repo of Jeremy's perwikity app which is still running on rails 2.
git clone git://github.com/jm/perwikity.git

cd perwikity

Next upgrade your rubygem version if it is not yet 1.3.6. Bundler won't work with rubygems that aren't the latest version.

gem update --system

Also if you don't yet have the dev libs for your database of choice you will need them:
sudo apt-get install libmysqlclient15-dev
sudo apt-get install libsqlite0-dev

Ensure you have the db gems:
gem install mysql
gem install sqlite3-ruby

Now for Rails 3.
Rails 3 has a bunch of dependancies which should install with:
gem install rails3b

Then install rails 3 with:
gem install rails --pre

Jeremy's instructions use Jeremy's rails_upgrade plugin, which likes rails 2.2.2
gem install rails -v=2.2.2

Then get the plugin with:

script/plugin install git://github.com/rails/rails_upgrade.git

You will also need railites:
gem install railties --pre

also rails . becomes
rails application .

And you will need to use:
bundle install

you can use bundle check first to see what will be installed when you run bundle install if you wish

That should put you in a position to follow the rest of the upgrade instructions in the book.

